# Nominations for the 2025 Memory Decoding Prize - Discussion

<a href="https://carboncopies.org/aspirational-neuroscience" target="_blank" style="display: inline-block; padding: 15px 30px; background-color: #2e279d; color: white; text-decoration: none; font-weight: bold; border-radius: 4px; font-size: 18px; transition: all 0.3s ease; box-shadow: 0 0 0 rgba(46, 39, 157, 0);" onmouseover="this.style.backgroundColor='#3a33c2'; this.style.boxShadow='0 0 20px rgba(46, 39, 157, 0.7)';" onmouseout="this.style.backgroundColor='#2e279d'; this.style.boxShadow='0 0 0 rgba(46, 39, 157, 0)';">
    On July 29, 2025 - @ 3 pm PDT (6 pm EDT, 00:00 CET)<br/>
    Click Here to join the session<br/>
    carboncopies.org/aspirational-neuroscience
  </a>


---

The [Memory Decoding Challenge](https://aspirationalneuroscience.org): Decode a non-trivial memory from a static map of synaptic connectivity.  
A journal club by Aspirational Neuroscience & the Carboncopies Foundation.  

Hosted by Dr. Kenneth Hayworth, Dr. Randal A. Koene and Ariel Zeleznikow-Johnston  
July 29, 2025

----

Join the discussion! We will be discussing the fit and merit of candidate papers to be nominated for the 2025 Memory Decoding Prize in Aspirational Neuroscience.
Prizes will be announced and presented at the Aspirational Neuroscience satellite event to the Annual Meeting of the Society for Neuroscience (Nov. 2025).
During this discussion it will still be possible to nominate additional papers for Memory Decoding prizes.
Papers will be evaluated for their fit to the challenge to "decode a non-trivial memory from static brain data" and for their impact and contribution to the field.

---

[Register](https://aspirationalneuroscience.org/register-with-us/) for updates about the Memory Decoding journal club and Aspirational Neuroscience Prize.
